                                                 Federal Department of Economic Affairs,
                                                 Education and Research EAER
                                                 State Secretariat for Education,
                                                 Research and Innovation SERI
                                                 EU Framework Programmes
Status Update: Swiss participation in Horizon Europe and related
programmes and initiatives
Information as of 4 March 2022
The State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) provides regular updates
on Switzerland's participation in the EU Framework Programmes for Research and Innovation
Horizon Europe and Horizon 2020:
Main changes have been made in the sections marked with                   .
 The State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI) informed the European
    Commission (EC) about the developments regarding Switzerland's second contribution, in
    view of opening association negotiations. In a response letter, the EC stated that at this point
    in time they are not in a position to discuss the next steps towards association exploratory
    talks and negotiations.
 In this context and following the information received from the EC, Switzerland will continue
    to be considered a non-associated third country for the submission of project proposals in
    Horizon Europe and related programmes and initiatives. This applies to Horizon Europe, the
    Euratom programme and the Digital Europe Programme. As far as the construction of ITER
    is concerned, the EU no longer considers Switzerland a participating state for the time being.
    However, a change of status of Switzerland by the EC remains possible. The association to
    Horizon Europe and related programmes and initiatives as soon as possible remains the
    declared goal of the Federal Council.
 Applicants based in Switzerland must submit their project proposals on the Funding &
    tenders portal as participants from a non-associated third country (‘associated partner’) until
    further notice. This applies not only to the calls with call identifier 2021, but also to the 2022
    calls (meaning 2021 or 2022 is included in the call ID) until further notice.
 As a non-associated third country, project participants based in Switzerland can still
    participate in most collaborative projects. The Swiss project partner will not be funded by
    the EC but by SERI. (For units of the central federal administration special conditions apply.)
 According to new guidance by the European Commission from January 2022, entities from
    non-associated third countries are now eligible to participate in Coordination and Support
    Actions (CSA) as ‘associated partners’ (unless the work programme or the grant agreement
    lays down additional conditions, which must be met to participate in the action).
 Please be aware that should Switzerland be reclassified by the EC as a "country to be
    associated" before the deadline of the corresponding calls, Swiss participants must change
    their status from ‘associated partner’ to ‘beneficiary’ in the project proposal and apply for
    funding from the EC. In this case, the budget must be included in the total amount of funding
    requested by the consortium from the EC.
 The participation in mono-beneficiary instruments (individual ERC grants, MSCA
    Postdoctoral Fellowships, MSCA COFUND and EIC Accelerator) is by principle excluded as
    a non-associated third country. However, an exception applies to the 2021 calls for ERC
    Starting Grants (StG), ERC Consolidator Grants (CoG) and the first cut-off of the EIC
    Accelerator. These were evaluated by the EC on an exceptional basis, as Switzerland was
    still classified as a ‘country to be associated’ by the EC at the time of the call deadline.

      Researchers and innovators with a successfully evaluated ERC StG or, ERC CoG or EIC
      Accelerator (after two evaluation stages) are awarded a ‘SERI-funded ERC Starting Grant’,
      ‘SERI-funded ERC Consolidator Grant’ or ‘SERI funded-EIC Accelerator Grant’ if they carry
      out their project in Switzerland.
 On September 17 2021, the Federal Council instructed SERI to initiate transitional measures,
      which the Parliament approved in December 2021. As a substitute for participation in the
      2021 ERC Advanced Grants (AdG), 2021 MSCA PF calls and the 2022 ERC StG, SERI has
      mandated the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) to implement transitional
      solutions. Furthermore, SERI will initiate additional transitional measures in cooperation
      with Innosuisse, the European Space Agency (ESA) and other stakeholders.
 In addition, SERI has mandated the SNSF to implement a transitional solution for the 2022
      ERC CoG call. It is based as far as possible on the EC's ERC CoG call, but with its own
      deadlines for project submission. In addition, SERI is currently examining possible
      transitional measures for the 2022 ERC AdG to be initiated if Switzerland's status in Horizon
      Europe will not have changed by the end of April 2022. The corresponding measure would
      be foreseen for the second half of 2022. SERI will provide further information in due time.
 On 4 March 2022, the Federal Council approved transitional measures for the 2022 EIC
      Accelerator calls. The financial resources for these measures still need to be approved by
      Parliament as part of the credit and budget process. The measures will be implemented by
      Innosuisse through a specific call for proposals for the ‘Swiss Accelerator’, which will be
      published on 1 April 2022.
 SERI is also currently examining possible transitional measures for further 2022 calls and
      will provide information in due time.
 Furthermore, the Federal Council has instructed SERI to examine suitable complementary
      measures, namely for programme parts that are no longer accessible (including for the calls
      in the Quantum and Space areas), such as replacement measures, which should only take
      effect if no association is possible in the long term.
1
  Please note that according to the EU nomenclature, all non-EU states are referred to as third countries. Within Horizon Europe, a distinction is
made between (i) associated countries and (ii) non-associated third countries. This nomenclature is also used in this document. Among the non-
associated third countries, participants from high-income third countries do normally not receive funding from the European Commission (EC), while
a number of low- and middle-income third countries are automatically eligible for EC funding. Detailed information can be found here.
INDEX
A.     GUIDELINES FOR PARTICIPANTS .............................................................................................. 3
   A.1 Collaborative projects .................................................................................................................... 3
   A.2 Mono-beneficiary projects ............................................................................................................. 4
B.     SWISS PARTICIPATION IN HORIZON EUROPE ......................................................................... 5
   B.1 State of play ................................................................................................................................... 5
   B.2 Transitional measures ................................................................................................................... 5
C.     PARTICIPATION IN HORIZON 2020 ............................................................................................. 6
D.     CONTACT ....................................................................................................................................... 6
                                                                                                                                                         2

  A. GUIDELINES FOR PARTICIPANTS
Please note: To provide further information on specific issues, SERI has also published a document
with the most “frequently asked questions and answer on the Swiss participation in Horizon Europe and
related programmes and initiatives” on its website.
    A.1 Collaborative projects
-    SERI recommends institutions based in Switzerland (including companies and notably SME) to
     participate in consortia responding to calls for proposals in Horizon Europe and in the Euratom
     programme.
-    As long as Switzerland participates in Horizon Europe as a non-associated third county, SERI will
     fund participants in collaborative projects. This also applies to collaborative projects within the Marie
     Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA Doctoral Networks and MSCA Staff Exchanges) and the
     European Innovation Council (EIC).
-    As a non-associated third country, a number of limitations apply that need to be taken into account:
             For researchers and innovators based in Switzerland, including companies and SME, the
              funding in collaborative projects is secured if the project is funded under Horizon Europe or
              related programmes and initiatives. In this case, funding to the Swiss entities will be
              provided directly by SERI. (For units of the central federal administration special conditions
              apply.)
             Any proposal needs to fulfil the general eligibility criteria. Any consortium needs a minimum
              of 3 independent partners from 3 different Member States or associated countries, of which
              at least one is based in a Member State. Any participants from non-associated third
              countries would only be possible as addition to these 3.
             Participants from non-associated third countries cannot coordinate projects. They can
              however lead work packages as any other participant.
             According to new guidance by the European Commission from January 2022, entities from
              non-associated third countries are eligible to participate in Coordination and Support
              Actions (CSA) as ‘associated partners’ (unless the work programme or the grant agreement
              lays down additional conditions which must be met to participate in the action).This rule is
              fully applicable under the current work programme. After the call deadline, Swiss partners
              can join projects as ‘associated partners’ at the discretion of the consortium and subject to
              approval by the granting authority (via an amendment if the grant was already signed), on
              a case-by-case basis.
             For collaborative projects of the European Research Council (ERC), namely ERC Synergy
              Grants, participants from non-associated third countries (e.g. Switzerland) can apply as part
              of a consortium. However, only one Principal Investigator linked to an institution based in a
              non-associated third country is permitted per project.
             European project partners should be assured that taking a Swiss partner aboard would not
              have a negative impact on the evaluation of the project. The evaluation by independent
              experts follows clear guidelines and criteria and any discrimination would explicitly violate
              the evaluation rules.
             As participants from a non-associated third country, Swiss researchers and innovators
              would need to explain at project submission how funding for their contribution will be
              secured. Corresponding financial guarantees for the calls 2021 and 2022, which can be
              shared with the consortium partners, are provided by SERI on its website.
             The Euresearch network, which is funded and mandated by SERI for this purpose, will
              continue to advise researchers and innovators in Switzerland planning to participate in
              Horizon Europe projects. We advise to seek their support when submitting projects.
-   In addition, SERI is preparing suitable measures for collaborative projects that are not accessible
    as a non-associated third country (notably in the field of quantum and space technologies) and will
    inform accordingly (see section B.2).
                                                                                                             3

-   If researchers and innovators have obtained Horizon Europe project funding in collaborative projects
    from an institution in an EU Member State or associated country and have accepted an appointment
    to an institution in Switzerland, as long as Switzerland is a non-associated third country, SERI will
    directly fund these researchers and innovators (through so-called transfer grants).
A.2 Mono-beneficiary projects
-   As a non-associated third country, a participation in mono-beneficiary instruments (namely ERC,
    MSCA Postdoctoral Fellowships, MSCA COFUND and EIC Accelerator) is no longer possible. This
    also applies to proposals already submitted that will not necessarily be evaluated.
-   However, exceptional rules apply to the 2021 calls of the ERC Starting (StG) and Consolidator
    Grants (CoG), which have already been closed. As the host institution for these projects can be
    changed during the preparation phase of the Grant Agreement, proposals submitted by Principal
    Investigatorsbased at a Swiss host institution will be evaluated. Researchers and innovators with a
    positively evaluated project proposal for an ERC StG 2021 or an ERC CoG 2021 (an application on
    the so-called ‘main list’ that would in principle be eligible for EU funding) are awarded a ‘SERI-
    funded ERC Starting Grant’ or ‘SERI-funded ERC Consolidator Grant’ from SERI if they carry out
    their project at an institution in Switzerland.
-   Researchers and innovators with a positively evaluated project proposals of the EIC Accelerator call
    2021 (after two evaluation stages) will receive a ‘SERI funded-EIC Accelerator Grant’.
-   As a substitute for the participation in the 2021 ERC Advanced Grants, 2021 MSCA Postdoctoral
    Fellowships calls and the 2022 ERC Starting and Consolidator Grants, SERI has assigned the Swiss
    National Science Foundation (SNSF) to implement transitional solutions (see section B.2).
-   The Federal Council also decided to initiate transitional measures for the 2022 EIC Accelerator calls.
    These measures will be implemented by Innosuisse (see section B.2).
-   In addition, SERI is currently examining possible transitional measures for the 2022 ERC AdG to be
    initiated if Switzerland's status in Horizon Europe will not have changed by the end of April 2022.
    The corresponding measure would be foreseen for the second half of 2022. SERI will provide further
    information in due time.
-   As a non-associated third country, a number of limitations apply that need to be taken into account:
             Researchers based in Switzerland remain eligible for the ERC StG, CoG and AdG and
              corresponding funding from the ECs long as they spend in addition to their affiliation and
              time at a Swiss institution, at least half of their working time in an institution in a EU Member
              State or an associated country and implement their ERC project at said institution (for more
              details see ERC work programme 2022).
             Since MSCA Postdoctoral Fellowships are mono-beneficiary instruments, the participation
              of non-associated third countries is restricted. Swiss institutions are not eligible to host
              European Postdoctoral Fellowships, but they can host researchers during the outgoing
              phase of Global Postdoctoral Fellowships.
             European Postdoctoral Fellowships are open to researchers of all nationalities. Swiss
              citizens are thus eligible to apply for European Postdoctoral Fellowships as long as their
              host institution is located in an EU Member State or associated country. In contrary, Global
              Postdoctoral Fellowships are restricted to citizens and long-term residents of an EU
              Member State or associated country.
             The Euresearch network, which is funded and mandated by SERI for this purpose, will
              continue to advise researchers and innovators in Switzerland planning to participate in
              Horizon Europe projects. We advise to seek their support when submitting projects.
-   If researchers and innovators have obtained Horizon Europe project funding for a mono-beneficiary
    grant (namely ERC StG, CoG, AdG) from an institution in an EU Member State or an associated
    country and have accepted an appointment to an institution in Switzerland, as long as Switzerland
    is a non-associated third country, SERI will directly fund these researchers and innovators (through
    so-called transfer grants).
                                                                                                              4

  B. SWISS PARTICIPATION IN HORIZON EUROPE
  B.1 State of play
-   The legal basis for Horizon Europe was adopted by the Council of the EU on 16 March 2021 and
    by the European Parliament on 27 April 2021. On 12 May 2021 the Horizon Europe Regulation
    officially entered into force. It is retroactively applied as of 1 January 2021.
-   The European Commission (EC) informed SERI on June 22nd that Switzerland will be treated as a
    non-associated third country for the submission of project proposals in Horizon Europe and related
    programmes and initiatives (see Horizon Europe Programme Guide).
-   According to information provided by the EC in November 2021, this status will also apply to the
    calls in 2022 until further notice. In a response letter, the EC stated that at this point in time they are
    not in a position to discuss the next steps towards association exploratory talks and negotiations.
-   Hence, participants in Switzerland receive their funding directly from SERI, namely in all projects
    that were fully evaluated, for which a participation is possible and a positive result of the evaluation
    is available.
  B.2 Transitional measures
-   On 17 September 2021, the Federal Council instructed SERI to introduce transitional measures.
    Planned transitional measures outside SERI were submitted to the Parliament with a subsequent
    notification for the 2022 budget and approved in December 2021. As a substitute for participation in
    the 2021 ERC Advanced Grants (AdG), 2021 MSCA Postdoctoral Fellowships (PF) calls and the
    2022 ERC Starting (StG) and Consolidator Grants (CoG), SERI has assigned the Swiss National
    Science Foundation (SNSF) to implement transitional solutions. These are based on the ERC StG,
    ERC AdG, ERC CoG and MSCA PF calls as far as possible. However, they have their own deadlines
    for project submission. Further information about the specific calls are available on the SNSF
    website.
-   Additional transitional measures will be initiated by SERI with Innosuisse, the European Space
    Agency (ESA) and other actors. As part of the transitional measures Innosuisse will engage in the
    Eureka clusters ITEA-4 and Xecs, whose calls for proposals will close at the end of 2021 and the
    beginning of 2022 respectively. In addition, innovation projects and systemic innovation in the
    framework of the Flagship Initiative will be strengthened at Innosuisse, as well as the BRIDGE
    programme. At ESA, the funds will be available from 2022 and will be used within the already
    running programmes Prodex and Artes.
         Innosuisse: International opportunities
         Innosuisse: Innovation projects
         Innosuisse: Flagship Initiative
         Swiss Space Office: PRODEX
         Swiss Space Office: ARTES
-   On 4 March 2022, the Federal Council approved transitional measures for the 2022 EIC Accelerator
    calls. The financial resources for these measures still need to be approved by Parliament as part of
    the credit and budget process. The measures will be implemented by Innosuisse through a specific
    call for proposals for the ‘Swiss Accelerator’, which will be published on 1 April 2022.
-   SERI is also currently examining possible transitional measures for the 2022 calls and will provide
    information in due course.
-   As a transitional measure, the Federal Council on 20 October 2021 approved the direct funding by
    SERI, of collaborative projects and accessible individual projects that have been positively
    evaluated by the EC. This measure was already included in the federal decree on the Horizon
    package and does not require any further consideration by the Parliament. It is therefore applicable
    with immediate effect. Switzerland's rapid association to Horizon Europe remains the Federal
    Council's declared goal.
                                                                                                              5

  C. PARTICIPATION IN HORIZON 2020
-   The bilateral agreement between Switzerland and the EU on Swiss association to Horizon 2020
    remains fully valid until all projects under the programme are effectively concluded.
-   The European Commission will continue to fund Swiss participants in projects, in which they were
    eligible for EU funding, until these projects are effectively concluded
-   SERI will continue to fund all projects linked to partial association (2014–2016).
-   The Swiss status in Horizon Europe has no implications for projects funded under Horizon 2020.
  D. CONTACT
-   For questions on the status of Switzerland and on federal funding of Swiss participation in
    EU projects:
    State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation SERI
    EU Framework Programmes
    Hotline +41 58 463 50 50, europrogram@sbfi.admin.ch
-   Media enquiries:
    State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation SERI
    Communications, tel +41 58 462 96 90, medien@sbfi.admin.ch
-   For questions on submitting research proposals:
    Euresearch, tel +41 31 380 60 00, info@euresearch.ch
                                                                                                   6

